ADR 012: Handlers validation and execution separation (#2631)
informalsystems/hermes: docs/architecture/adr-012-handlers-redesign.md

# ADR 012: Handlers validation and execution separation

## Status
Proposed

## Changelog
* 9/9/2022: initial proposal

## Context

The main purpose of this ADR is to split each IBC handler (e.g. `UpdateClient`, `ConnOpenTry`, etc.) into a "validation" and an "execution" phase in order to accomodate a larger class of host architectures such as Namada. We call "validation" the part of a handler that does all the checks necessary for correctness. We call "execution" the part of the handler that applies the state modifications, assuming that validation passed. 

> Our current `deliver()` entrypoint can then be split into 2 entrypoints: `validate()` and `execute()`. More specifically, we replace the current `Ics26Context` and all its supertraits with 2 traits: `ValidationContext` and `ExecutionContext`. `ValidationContext` exposes and implements the `validate()` entrypoint, while the `ExecutionContext` exposes and implements the `execute()` entrypoint.

Reviewer: I chose not to modify `deliver()` and keep the current implementation because I think `validate()` and `execute()` will have some overlapping code so it might not be ideal to split `deliver()` (see https://github.com/informalsystems/ibc-rs/issues/2582#issuecomment-1229988512). I think it is best to keep these functions separate.

Author: I saw this sentence as more of giving an intuition for what `validate()` and `execute()` do and where they come from, as opposed to suggesting that `deliver()` should literally be `validate()` then `execute()`. We should reword it though if that's not clear!

> Our current `deliver()` entrypoint can then be split into 2 entrypoints: `validate()` and `execute()`. More specifically, we replace the current `Ics26Context` and all its supertraits with 2 traits: `ValidationContext` and `ExecutionContext`. `ValidationContext` exposes and implements the `validate()` entrypoint, while the `ExecutionContext` exposes and implements the `execute()` entrypoint.

Reviewer: We will also need a `checkTx` equivalent which might not be the same as `validate()`. https://github.com/informalsystems/ibc-rs/issues/2094

This ADR will only concern itself with the external-facing API.

The following are out of scope for this ADR:
+ Exposing an `async` API
+ Enabling light clients to define and require the host to implement a set of traits

## Decision

### "validation" and "execution" clarification
We first clarify what is meant by "validation" and "execution" with an example. Consider the [`UpdateClient` handler](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc/blob/main/spec/core/ics-002-client-semantics/README.md#update). The validation and execution blocks are:

```javascript
function updateClient(
  id: Identifier,
  clientMessage: ClientMessage) {
    // Validation START
    clientState = provableStore.get(clientStatePath(id))
    abortTransactionUnless(clientState !== null)

    clientState.VerifyClientMessage(clientMessage)
    // Validation END
    
    // Execution START

>     foundMisbehaviour := clientState.CheckForMisbehaviour(clientMessage)

Reviewer: I think `CheckForMisbehaviour` should also be part of the `validation` here.

Author: Why do you say so? How I see it, it is not validation because it cannot make the execution fail. Rather, it is a `boolean` that you get to inform "how to do the execution": `UpdateStateOnMisbehaviour` or `UpdateState`.

    /// An event logging facility.
    type EventEmitter: EventEmitter<Event=Event<DefaultIbcTypes>>;

    /// Methods to access the store (ro & rw). 
    fn store(&self) -> &Self::KvStore;
    fn store_mut(&mut self) -> &mut Self::KvStore;

    /// Methods to access the event logger (ro & rw).
    fn event_emitter(&self) -> &Self::EventEmitter;
    fn event_emitter_mut(&mut self) -> &mut Self::EventEmitter;

    /// Host system data (that is not required to be stored on the KV store)
    fn current_timestamp(&self) -> IbcTimestamp;
    fn current_height(&self) -> IbcHeight;

    /* Other methods that cannot be derived from the Store... */
}
```

See the Appendix A below for an exhaustive list of all `Host` methods.

This `Host` trait implementation may then be used to derive blanket implementations for all other contexts such as
`ValidationContext`, `ExecutionContext`, `Ics26Context`, etc. For e.g. ->

```rust
pub struct HostValidationContext<H> {
    host: H,
}

impl<H: Host> HostValidationContext<H> {
    pub fn new(host: Host) -> Self {
        Self { host }
    }
}

impl<H: Host> ValidationContext for HostValidationContext<H> { /* ... */ }
```

#### Store

> Hosts are expected to implement the `IbcStore` trait that provides access to all IBC paths as defined

Reviewer: Note: we currently do not differentiate between provable and private stores since `ibc::core::ics24_host::path::Path` doesn't differentiate between provable and private paths.

This `Host` trait implementation may then be used to derive blanket implementations for all other contexts such as
`ValidationContext`, `ExecutionContext`, `Ics26Context`, etc. For e.g. ->

```rust
pub struct HostValidationContext<H> {
    host: H,
}

impl<H: Host> HostValidationContext<H> {
    pub fn new(host: Host) -> Self {
        Self { host }
    }
}

impl<H: Host> ValidationContext for HostValidationContext<H> { /* ... */ }
```

#### Store

Hosts are expected to provide an implementation of the `IbcStore` trait that provides access to all IBC paths as defined
by `ibc::core::ics24_host::path::Path`.

```rust
pub trait IbcStore<Error>:
TypedStore<ClientTypePath, ClientType, Error=Error>
+ TypedStore<ClientStatePath, Box<dyn ClientState>, Error=Error>
+ TypedStore<ClientConsensusStatePath, Box<dyn ConsensusState>, Error=Error>
/* + other IbcTypedStore */
{}
```

The generic `TypedStore` trait is defined as follows ->

```rust
pub trait TypedStore<K, V> {
    type Error;

    fn set(&mut self, key: K, value: V) -> Result<(), Self::Error>;

    fn get(&self, key: K) -> Result<Option<V>, Self::Error>;

    fn delete(&mut self, key: K) -> Result<(), Self::Error>;
}
```

> Note that depending on data-availability requirements some clients may need access to earlier state, so we might need
> a `get_at_height()` in the future.

Author: ```suggestion
Note that some clients may require more additional methods from the `Host`, such as a `get_at_height()` method that allows access state at arbitrary heights. While the current API doesn't allow that, future versions will.
```

Hosts may choose to implement the `TypedStore` trait individually for every IBC path-value combination or generically as
a blanket implementation.

> ##### Paths with associated values

Author: We should rework this section, I'm not clear on how it fits with the whole

# ADR 012: Handlers validation and execution separation

## Status
Proposed

## Changelog
* 9/9/2022: initial proposal

## Context

> The main purpose of this ADR is to split each IBC handler (e.g. `UpdateClient`, `ConnOpenTry`, etc.) into a "validation" and an "execution" phase in order to accomodate a larger class of host architectures such as Namada. We call "validation" the part of a handler that does all the checks necessary for correctness. We call "execution" the part of the handler that applies the state modifications, assuming that validation passed. 

Author: Good idea! [d2d67e4](https://github.com/informalsystems/ibc-rs/pull/2631/commits/d2d67e48fd614b99b24c28013a29c48408108ffb)

> Our current `deliver()` entrypoint can then be split into 2 entrypoints: `validate()` and `execute()`. More specifically, we replace the current `Ics26Context` and all its supertraits with 2 traits: `ValidationContext` and `ExecutionContext`. `ValidationContext` exposes and implements the `validate()` entrypoint, while the `ExecutionContext` exposes and implements the `execute()` entrypoint. Note that we will still expose `deliver()` (perhaps slightly modified) for convenience.

Author: `deliver()` will exist alongside `validate()` and `execute()` for "SDK-like" architectures such as Nomic who simply want to run validation followed by execution.

What do you mean by a backdoor here?

> Our current `deliver()` entrypoint can then be split into 2 entrypoints: `validate()` and `execute()`. More specifically, we replace the current `Ics26Context` and all its supertraits with 2 traits: `ValidationContext` and `ExecutionContext`. `ValidationContext` exposes and implements the `validate()` entrypoint, while the `ExecutionContext` exposes and implements the `execute()` entrypoint. Note that we will still expose `deliver()` (perhaps slightly modified) for convenience.

Reviewer 2: > What do you mean by a backdoor here?

I was under the impression that we wanted users to move away from the old `deliver()` API towards the new APIs, but I realize that that was not explicitly stated. So perhaps the 'correct' way to read the intention of this ADR is that it's simply giving users more flexibility as far as how to use the API, not necessarily trying to get them to migrate to the new APIs.

    // Validation START
    clientState = provableStore.get(clientStatePath(id))
    abortTransactionUnless(clientState !== null)

    clientState.VerifyClientMessage(clientMessage)
    // Validation END
    
    // Execution START
    foundMisbehaviour := clientState.CheckForMisbehaviour(clientMessage)
    if foundMisbehaviour {
        clientState.UpdateStateOnMisbehaviour(clientMessage)
    }
    else {    
        clientState.UpdateState(clientMessage) 
    }
    // Execution END
}
```

### `ValidationContext` and `ExecutionContext`
Below, we define the `ValidationContext` and `ExecutionContext`.

```rust
trait ValidationContext {
    /// Validation entrypoint.
    fn validate(&self, message: Any) -> Result<(), Error> {
        /* implemented by us */
    }

    /* See Appendix A for a full method list */
}
```

```rust
trait ExecutionContext {
    /// Execution entrypoint
    fn execute(&mut self, message: Any) -> Result<(), Error> {
        /* implemented by us */
    }

    /* See Appendix A for a full method list */
}
```

A useful way to understand how these traits work together is in seeing how *they could* be used to implement `deliver()`.

```rust

> fn deliver<V, E>(val_ctx: &V, exec_ctx: &mut E, message: Any) -> Result<(), Error> {

Author: Good catch! [d3e0c38](https://github.com/informalsystems/ibc-rs/pull/2631/commits/d3e0c38ea98b8dcae5e895c93617ce91043e1dde)
